# Bacterial-Growth # University of South Florida laboratories - Bacterial Growth Simulation ## Overview   This project contains a script for simulating bacterial growth using various parameters for volume, time, and cell information. It includes functionality to plot growth curves and validate inputs to ensure they are within acceptable ranges.The bacterial_growth.py is a comprehensive bacterial growth simulation tool designed to model and analyze the growth of bacterial cultures, specifically using E. coli. The script includes classes to manage volume, time, and cell information, and handles plotting and calculations related to bacterial growth. The call_bacterial_growth.py simulates bacterial growth using either predefined data or user input. It calculates and plots bacterial concentration and population size over time, with options for inputting experimental parameters directly or using provided data sets. The ecoli_data.py collected data that can be call into scripts to analyze.I’m currently in the early stages of programming, and I have a lot of work ahead. My goal is to become familiar with Python and GitHub.  ## stand alone Functions (working on)- **average_initial_od:** Calculate the average initial optical density (OD) from the provided data. - **calculate_lagged:** need Code- **linear_growth:** Estimates the linear growth of bacterial culture based on OD600 measurements.- **poly3_growth:** Estimates the polynomial degree of 3 growth of bacterial culture based on OD600 measurements.- **calculate_stationary_od:** Calculate the average steady OD from the provided data.## Features - **Volume Information:** Manage and validate volume-related parameters. - **Time Information:** Manage and validate time-related parameters. - **Cell Information:** Manage and validate cell-related parameters. - **Plotting:** Visualize bacterial growth simulation results with plotting functionality. - **GrowthConfiguration:** Manage all configuration information for bacterial growth simulation.- **Validation:** Ensure inputs are valid and handle errors gracefully. - **Simulation:** Perform bacterial growth simulation and analyze results. ## Installation To use this script, you need to have Python 3, packages numpy and pylab installed and imports:  - import copy, math  - from pylab import plot,xlabel,ylabel,yscale,grid,title,show,figure,subplot,legend,xticks- from numpy import mean,array,arange,zeros,argmax,exp,poly1d,polyfit,diff,log,std- from scipy.stats import linregress- from ecoli_data import *You can install pylab, numpy, and scipy packages using pip: ## Define volume information volume_info = VolumeInformation(total_volume=25, sample_volume=200, dilute_volume=1800) # Functionsinit(self, total_volume, sample_volume, dilute_volume): Initializes the volume parameters.get_total_volume(self): Returns the total volume of the sample.get_sample_volume(self): Returns the volume of the sample.get_dilute_volume(self): Returns the volume of the diluent.  ## Define time information time_info = TimeInformation(lagged_time=2*60, target_time=60*7, double_time=60*2.5, final_time=60*10) # Functionsinit(self, lagged_time, target_time, double_time, final_time): Initializes the time parameters.get_lagged_time(self): Returns the lagged time.get_target_time(self): Returns the target time.get_double_time(self): Returns the doubling time.get_final_time(self): Returns the final simulation time.  ## Define cell information cell_info = CellInformation(cell_mass=47.65e-6, cell_per_volume=1E7) # Functionsinit(self, cell_mass, cell_per_volume): Initializes the cell parameters.get_cell_mass(self): Returns the mass of a single bacterial cell.get_cell_per_volume(self): Returns the number of cells per mL when saturated.  ## Define Plot - Class to handle plotting and linear interpolation of bacterial growth simulation results.# Functionsinit(self,data=None,target_time=None, initial_read=None, final_time=None): Initializes the plot parameters.validate_inputs(self): Validates the input parameters. plot_result(self,read,dilute_conversion,time):         Plot and calculation linear interpolations the results of bacterial growth simulation plot_growth_curve(self, time, concentration, title): Plots the growth curve of the bacteria.calculate_double_time(self, deg=3): Calculates and plots the double time for bacterial growth.plot_data(self, bacterial_title): Plots the data runs with their average line.calculate_data_average(self): Calculates the average of a set of data runs.plot_data_model(self,read,time): Plot the bacterial growth data average points and the Model.calculate_double_time(self) : Estimates the bacterial doubling time based on OD600 measurements.## Define GrowthConfiguration - Class to hold all configuration information for bacterial growth simulation.# Functionsinit(self, volume_information, time_information, cell_information): Initialize the Plot class with the provided parameters.## Define BacterialGrowth - Class to simulate bacterial growth using given parameters.# Functionsinit(self, initial_read, data, configuration): Initializes the bacterial growth simulation parameters.calculate_growth_rate(self): Calculate the growth rate value based on the doubling time in minutes.calculation_measurements(self): Calculate the growth curve for bacterial culture based on given parameters.print_information(self,target_amount,target_original_count): Print relative informationvalidate_inputs(self) : Validate inputs to ensure they are within acceptable ranges or types.bacterial_growth(self): Performs the bacterial growth simulation and analysis.## Run the bacterial growth simulation and plots using script - call_bacterial_growth.py '''        Call bacterial_growth simulation script        '''    # Input data    test = eppendorf_data # dictionary of the data transfer from ecoli_data.py        # Input Parameters    sample_volume= 200 # Volume of the sample in microliters    dilute_volume= 1800 # Volume of diluent added in microliters    target_time = 120 # Time for the desired CFU size in minutes    final_time = 1000 # Time for the desired end time in minutes     cell_mass = 1e-6 # mass of bacteria in micrograms    cell_per_volume = 1e9 # liquid concentration in cell/mL        # ---------- Option 1 ----------------------------------------------------    # Input for user inputs if no data is provided    if not test:            # Data attained from inputs in the Eppendorf BioSpectrometer kinetic         initial_read =  0.5 # Initial average OD600 reading in micrograms/mL        stationary_od = 4.3 # Steady State OD600 before declining in micrograms/mL        # ---------- Option 2 ----------------------------------------------------    # Input for user inputs if data is provided    else:         # enter parameters with data:        # Data attained from inputs in the Eppendorf BioSpectrometer kinetic         initial_read = average_initial_od(data=test) # Initial average OD600 reading in micrograms/mL        stationary_od = calculate_stationary_od(data=test) # Steady State OD600 before declining in micrograms/mL         # poly_fun_is_valid = 'yes': when the double time can be calculated        # poly_fun_is_valid = 'no': when the double time will be enter as a         # parameter by the user.        poly_fun_is_valid = 'yes'## Classes and Methods VolumeInformation: Holds volume-related parameters.TimeInformation: Holds time-related parameters.CellInformation: Holds cell-related parameters.Plot: Handles plotting of the simulation results.BacterialGrowth: Performs the bacterial growth simulation and analysis. # VolumeInformation Manages volume-related parameters. Parameters total_volume (float): Total volume of the sample in mL. sample_volume (float): Volume of the sample in mL. dilute_volume (float): Volume of the diluent in mL. # TimeInformation Manages time-related parameters. Parameters target_time (int or float): Time in minutes for the desired CFU count. lagged_time (int or float): Time in minutes for the bacterial population to stay constant. double_time (int or float): Time in minutes for the bacterial population to double. final_time (int or float): Final simulation time in minutes. # CellInformation Manages cell-related parameters. Parameters cell_mass (float): Mass of a single bacterial cell in micrograms. cell_per_volume (float): Number of cells per mL when saturated. # BacterialGrowth Performs bacterial growth simulation and analysis. # Methods validate_inputs(): Validates the input parameters. bacterial_growth(): Performs the bacterial growth simulation and returns the read and dilute conversion arrays. Error Handling The script includes error handling to manage issues that may arise during execution, such as invalid input values. This ensures that the simulation runs smoothly and provides informative error messages when issues occur. # Inputs:  initial_read: Initial read from spectrometer in micrograms/mLdata: Data collected using BioSpectrometer kinetic instrumenttotal_volume: Total volume of sample in mLsample_volume: Volume of the sample in microlitersdilute_volume: Volume of diluent added in microliterslagged_time: Time in minutes for the bacterial population to stay constanttarget_time: Time in minutes for the desired Colony-Forming Units sizedouble_time: Time in minutes for bacterial population to doublefinal_time: Final simulation time in minutescell_mass: Mass of a single bacterial cell in microgramscell_per_volume: Number of cells per mL when saturated # Calculations:The average data is calculated and plotted.The calculation accounts for the lagged time and exponential growth of bacteria restricted by the original total volume.The estimated double time for bacteria to double its size in minutes.dilute_conversion: Corrected concentration considering dilution factor (unitless)rate: Growth rate in 1/minutemax_od: Maximum concentration in micrograms/mL1 OD600 = saturation1 OD600 = 10 microgram/mL# Outputs:Prints all input parametersPrints target time with the predicted reading in micrograms/mL and colony-forming unitsPlots population size scaling up to the original total volume the sample was collected from in Colony Forming Units vs time in minutesPlots population size in diluted sample size in micrograms/mL vs time in minutesUsing linear interpolation, plots the desired target time and target amount on both plots.Plots data if given, which can be plotted with the model or alone.Linear x-axis and linear y-axisReturns read array and dilute conversion array! [Output plot 1](images/Figure_2024-08-04_142619.png)! [Output plot 2](images/Figure_2024-08-04_142651.png)! [Output plot 3](images/Figure_2024-08-04_142735.png)## Example Print Output### Inputs- **Initial read**: 0.04 micrograms/mL- **Stationary OD**: 4.30 micrograms/mL- **Original sample volume**: 4.2 mL- **Lagged time**: 20 minutes- **Double time**: 40.00 minutes- **Cell mass**: 1e-06 micrograms- **Cell count per volume**: 1.00e+09 CFU/mL- **Sample volume**: 0.2 mL- **Dilute volume**: 1.8 mL### Outputs at Target Time (120 minutes)- **Target cell concentration read**: 0.2205 micrograms/mL- **Target cell size in colony-forming units**: 6.76e+09 CFU### User Prompt- **Is the current double time suitable? (yes/no)**: yes# Contributions Contributions are welcome! If you find any bugs or have suggestions for improvements, please open an issue or submit a pull request.    ## License     ## Acknowledgements Students and Professors at University of South Florida   ### Explanation TO-DO-LIST 1. **Overview**: Brief introduction to the project and its purpose. 2. **Features**: List of main features of the script. 3. **Installation**: Instructions on how to install necessary dependencies. 4. **Usage**: Example code demonstrating how to use the script. 5. **Classes and Methods**: Detailed information about the main classes and methods. 6. **Error Handling**: Information on how the script handles errors. 7. **Contributions**: Guidelines for contributing to the project. 8. **License**: License information. 9. **Acknowledgements**: Credits and acknowledgments. Do list:    1. lagged time, death rate, death time    2. How does different Broth impact growth rate?    3. Calculation of lagged, double, and stable time in def calculation_measurements    4. create a separate script for different bacteria    5. create a separate script for different media    6. make most inputs calculated if data is provided.     7. * find a better method to calculate double time.